README.md, before:

# OpenGL Rendering Engine

A modern C++ rendering engine built with OpenGL, featuring deferred rendering, shadow mapping, and a flexible Entity-Component-System architecture.

## Features

### Rendering Pipeline
- **Deferred Rendering**: Multi-pass rendering pipeline with G-buffer for efficient lighting
- **Shadow Mapping**: Support for directional, spot, and point light shadows
- **Post-Processing**: FXAA anti-aliasing
- **Skybox Rendering**: Cubemap-based environment rendering
- **Instanced Rendering**: Efficient rendering of multiple objects

### Lighting System
- **Point Lights**: Omnidirectional lighting with attenuation
- **Spot Lights**: Cone-shaped lighting with cutoff angles
- **Directional Light**: Sun-like lighting for outdoor scenes
- **Real-time Shadows**: Dynamic shadow casting for all light types

### Animation System
- **B-Spline Animation**: Smooth curve-based object animation
- **Flexible Animation Interface**: Extensible animation system for custom implementations
- **Time-based Animation**: Frame-rate independent animation updates

### Asset Support
- **3D Model Loading**: Support for OBJ and glTF formats via Assimp
- **Texture Loading**: Diffuse, specular, normal, and alpha maps
- **Primitive Generation**: Built-in shapes (cube, sphere, plane, B-spline curves)

### Architecture
- **Entity-Component-System**: Flexible, data-oriented design
- **Component-based**: Modular system for transforms, meshes, lights, and animations
- **Scene Management**: Easy scene creation and management

## Dependencies

### Required Libraries
- **OpenGL 4.3+**: Core graphics API
- **GLFW 3.4**: Window management and input handling
- **GLM**: Mathematics library for graphics
- **Assimp**: 3D model loading
- **GLAD**: OpenGL loader
- **STB Image**: Texture loading

### Build System
- **CMake 3.16+**: Cross-platform build system
- **C++20**: Modern C++ standard

## Building

### Prerequisites
1. Install CMake (3.16 or higher)
2. Install a C++20 compatible compiler (Visual Studio 2022, GCC 10+, or Clang 11+)

### Windows (Visual Studio)
```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake .. -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64
cmake --build . --config Release
```

### Linux/macOS
```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
make -j$(nproc)
```

## Project Structure

```
Rendering Project/
├── 3dparty/                 # Third-party libraries
│   ├── assimp/             # 3D model loading
│   ├── glad/               # OpenGL loader
│   ├── glfw-3.4.bin.WIN64/ # Window management
│   ├── GLEW/               # OpenGL extension loading
│   └── glm/                # Mathematics library
├── Assets/                  # Game assets
│   ├── skybox/             # Skybox textures
│   ├── stylized_crystal_cluster/
│   └── ...                 # Other 3D models and textures
├── Shaders/                # GLSL shader files
├── Animation.h             # Animation system
├── Camera.h                # First-person camera
├── Component.h             # ECS component base
├── EntityComponentSystem.h # ECS implementation
├── Mesh.h                  # 3D mesh handling
├── Shader.h                # Shader management
├── Texture.h               # Texture loading and management
├── WindowContext.h         # Window and input management
├── frameBufferObject.h     # FBO abstractions
├── exameScene.h           # Example scene implementation
├── main.cpp               # Application entry point
└── CMakeLists.txt         # Build configuration
```

## Usage

### Basic Scene Creation

```cpp
#include "EntityComponentSystem.h"
#include "WindowContext.h"

class MyScene : public Scene {
public:
    MyScene(std::unique_ptr<IRenderer> renderer) 
        : Scene(std::move(renderer)) {}

protected:
    void loadScene() override {
        // Create a simple object
        EntityID entity = createEntity();
        
        // Add transform component
        Transform transform;
        transform.position = glm::vec3(0.0f, 0.0f, -5.0f);
        addComponent(entity, transform);
        
        // Add mesh renderer
        MeshRenderer renderer;
        auto mesh = std::make_shared<BasicMesh>();
        mesh->LoadMesh("path/to/model.obj");
        renderer.mesh = mesh;
        addComponent(entity, renderer);
        
        // Add lighting
        EntityID light = createEntity();
        PointLight pointLight(
            glm::vec3(2.0f, 2.0f, 2.0f), // position
            glm::vec3(0.1f),              // ambient
            glm::vec3(0.8f),              // diffuse  
            glm::vec3(1.0f),              // specular
            1.0f, 25.0f                   // near, far
        );
        addComponent(light, pointLight);
    }
};

int main() {
    WindowContext window(1920, 1080, "My Rendering Engine");
    
    auto renderer = std::make_unique<DeferredRenderer>(window);
    auto scene = std::make_unique<MyScene>(std::move(renderer));
    
    scene->initialize();
    
    while (!window.shouldClose()) {
        window.processInput();
        scene->render();
        window.swapBuffersAndPollEvents();
    }
    
    return 0;
}
```

### Animation Example

```cpp
// Create animated object
EntityID animatedEntity = createEntity();

// Set up B-spline animation path
std::vector<glm::vec3> path = {
    glm::vec3(0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f),
    glm::vec3(5.0f, 2.0f, 0.0f),
    glm::vec3(10.0f, 0.0f, 5.0f),
    glm::vec3(0.0f, 0.0f, 10.0f)
};

std::vector<float> timing = {2.0f, 2.0f, 2.0f, 2.0f}; // Duration for each segment

Animation animComponent;
animComponent.animation = std::make_unique<BSplineAnimation>(path, timing, true);
addComponent(animatedEntity, std::move(animComponent));
```

## Controls

- **WASD**: Camera movement
- **Mouse**: Look around
- **Ctrl+P**: Increase movement speed
- **Ctrl+R**: Reset movement speed
- **Mouse Wheel**: Zoom in/out

## Technical Details

### Deferred Rendering Pipeline
1. **Geometry Pass**: Renders scene geometry to G-buffer (position, normal, color, depth)
2. **Shadow Pass**: Generates shadow maps for all light types
3. **Lighting Pass**: Combines G-buffer data with lighting calculations
4. **Forward Pass**: Renders transparent objects and skybox
5. **Post-Processing**: Applies FXAA anti-aliasing

### Shadow Mapping
- **Directional Lights**: Standard shadow mapping with orthographic projection
- **Spot Lights**: Shadow mapping with perspective projection stored in texture arrays
- **Point Lights**: Cube shadow mapping for omnidirectional shadows

### Memory Layout
The ECS uses cache-friendly packed arrays for optimal performance:
- Components are stored contiguously in memory
- Fast iteration over component types
- Efficient cache usage during rendering

## License

This project uses assets from Sketchfab with appropriate licensing:
- Some models under CC-BY-4.0 license (attribution required)
- Some models under Sketchfab Standard license
- See individual license.txt files in Assets/ subdirectories

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

**Build fails with missing dependencies:**
- Ensure all submodules are initialized: `git submodule update --init --recursive`
- Check that CMake can find all required libraries

**Runtime crashes:**
- Verify OpenGL 4.3+ support on your graphics card
- Check that asset paths are correct in PathConfig.h
- Ensure all required DLLs are in the output directory

**Poor performance:**
- Enable GPU hardware acceleration
- Check that you're using the discrete GPU (not integrated graphics)
- Verify shaders compile successfully (check console output)

## Roadmap

- [ ] PBR (Physically Based Rendering) materials
- [ ] Screen Space Ambient Occlusion (SSAO)
- [ ] Volumetric lighting
- [ ] Particle systems
- [ ] Audio integration
- [ ] ImGui integration for debugging
- [ ] Vulkan backend

---

*This project was created as part of a computer graphics course, demonstrating modern rendering techniques and software architecture principles.*

Commit message:

Update  Disclaimer in README.md

README.md, after:

# Simple Rendering Engine

A modular C++ rendering engine built with OpenGL, featuring shadow mapping and a flexible Entity-Component-System architecture. Currently implements deferred rendering with plans for additional rendering backends.

## Disclaimer

This project was created for learning purposes, so the code style varies throughout different files as my understanding evolved during development. The handling of external dependencies like Assimp and GLEW may not follow best practices - I opted to include them directly in the project to ensure ease of setup and compilation.

## Features

### Rendering Pipeline
- **Deferred Rendering**: Multi-pass rendering pipeline with G-buffer for efficient lighting
- **Shadow Mapping**: Support for directional, spot, and point light shadows
- **Post-Processing**: FXAA anti-aliasing
- **Skybox Rendering**: Cubemap-based environment rendering
- **Instanced Rendering**: Efficient rendering of multiple objects

### Lighting System
- **Point Lights**: Omnidirectional lighting with attenuation
- **Spot Lights**: Cone-shaped lighting with cutoff angles
- **Directional Light**: Sun-like lighting for outdoor scenes
- **Real-time Shadows**: Dynamic shadow casting for all light types

### Animation System
- **B-Spline Animation**: Smooth curve-based object animation
- **Flexible Animation Interface**: Extensible animation system for custom implementations
- **Time-based Animation**: Frame-rate independent animation updates

### Asset Support
- **3D Model Loading**: Support for OBJ and glTF formats via Assimp
- **Texture Loading**: Diffuse, specular, normal, and alpha maps
- **Primitive Generation**: Built-in shapes (cube, sphere, plane, B-spline curves)

### Architecture
- **Entity-Component-System**: Flexible, data-oriented design
- **Component-based**: Modular system for transforms, meshes, lights, and animations
- **Scene Management**: Easy scene creation and management

## Dependencies

### Required Libraries
- **OpenGL 4.3+**: Core graphics API
- **GLFW 3.4**: Window management and input handling
- **GLM**: Mathematics library for graphics
- **Assimp**: 3D model loading
- **GLAD**: OpenGL loader
- **STB Image**: Texture loading

### Build System
- **CMake 3.16+**: Cross-platform build system
- **C++20**: Modern C++ standard

## Building

### Prerequisites
1. Install CMake (3.16 or higher)
2. Install a C++20 compatible compiler (Visual Studio 2022, GCC 10+, or Clang 11+) 

### Windows (Visual Studio)
```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake .. -G "Visual Studio 17 2022" -A x64
cmake --build . --config Release
```

### Linux/macOS
```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake .. -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
make -j$(nproc)
```

## Project Structure

```
Rendering Project/
├── 3dparty/                 # Third-party libraries
│   ├── assimp/             # 3D model loading
│   ├── glad/               # OpenGL loader
│   ├── glfw-3.4.bin.WIN64/ # Window management
│   ├── GLEW/               # OpenGL extension loading
│   └── glm/                # Mathematics library
├── Assets/                  # Game assets
│   ├── skybox/             # Skybox textures
│   ├── stylized_crystal_cluster/
│   └── ...                 # Other 3D models and textures
├── Shaders/                # GLSL shader files
├── Animation.h             # Animation system
├── Camera.h                # First-person camera
├── Component.h             # ECS component base
├── EntityComponentSystem.h # ECS implementation
├── Mesh.h                  # 3D mesh handling
├── Shader.h                # Shader management
├── Texture.h               # Texture loading and management
├── WindowContext.h         # Window and input management
├── frameBufferObject.h     # FBO abstractions
├── exameScene.h           # Example scene implementation
├── main.cpp               # Application entry point
└── CMakeLists.txt         # Build configuration
```

## Usage

### Basic Scene Creation

```cpp
#include "EntityComponentSystem.h"
#include "WindowContext.h"

class MyScene : public Scene {
public:
    MyScene(std::unique_ptr<IRenderer> renderer) 
        : Scene(std::move(renderer)) {}

protected:
    void loadScene() override {
        // Create a simple object
        EntityID entity = createEntity();
        
        // Add transform component
        Transform transform;
        transform.position = glm::vec3(0.0f, 0.0f, -5.0f);
        addComponent(entity, transform);
        
        // Add mesh renderer
        MeshRenderer renderer;
        auto mesh = std::make_shared<BasicMesh>();
        mesh->LoadMesh("path/to/model.obj");
        renderer.mesh = mesh;
        addComponent(entity, renderer);
        
        // Add lighting
        EntityID light = createEntity();
        PointLight pointLight(
            glm::vec3(2.0f, 2.0f, 2.0f), // position
            glm::vec3(0.1f),              // ambient
            glm::vec3(0.8f),              // diffuse  
            glm::vec3(1.0f),              // specular
            1.0f, 25.0f                   // near, far
        );
        addComponent(light, pointLight);
    }
};

int main() {
    WindowContext window(1920, 1080, "My Rendering Engine");
    
    auto renderer = std::make_unique<DeferredRenderer>(window);
    auto scene = std::make_unique<MyScene>(std::move(renderer));
    
    scene->initialize();
    
    while (!window.shouldClose()) {
        window.processInput();
        scene->render();
        window.swapBuffersAndPollEvents();
    }
    
    return 0;
}
```

### Animation Example

```cpp
// Create animated object
EntityID animatedEntity = createEntity();

// Set up B-spline animation path
std::vector<glm::vec3> path = {
    glm::vec3(0.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f),
    glm::vec3(5.0f, 2.0f, 0.0f),
    glm::vec3(10.0f, 0.0f, 5.0f),
    glm::vec3(0.0f, 0.0f, 10.0f)
};

std::vector<float> timing = {2.0f, 2.0f, 2.0f, 2.0f}; // Duration for each segment

Animation animComponent;
animComponent.animation = std::make_unique<BSplineAnimation>(path, timing, true);
addComponent(animatedEntity, std::move(animComponent));
```

## Controls

- **WASD**: Camera movement
- **Mouse**: Look around
- **Ctrl press**: Increase movement speed
- **Ctrl relese**: Reset movement speed

## Technical Details

### Deferred Rendering Pipeline
1. **Geometry Pass**: Renders scene geometry to G-buffer (position, normal, color, depth)
2. **Shadow Pass**: Generates shadow maps for all light types
3. **Lighting Pass**: Combines G-buffer data with lighting calculations
4. **Forward Pass**: Renders transparent objects and skybox
5. **Post-Processing**: Applies FXAA anti-aliasing

### Shadow Mapping
- **Directional Lights**: Standard shadow mapping with orthographic projection
- **Spot Lights**: Shadow mapping with perspective projection stored in texture arrays
- **Point Lights**: Cube shadow mapping for omnidirectional shadows

### Memory Layout
The ECS uses cache-friendly packed arrays for optimal performance:
- Components are stored contiguously in memory
- Fast iteration over component types
- Efficient cache usage during rendering

## License

This project uses assets from Sketchfab with appropriate licensing:
- Some models under CC-BY-4.0 license (attribution required)
- Some models under Sketchfab Standard license
- See individual license.txt files in Assets/ subdirectories

## Troubleshooting

## Roadmap

- [ ] Object ancor concept
- [ ] Forward Rendering  
- [ ] PBR (Physically Based Rendering) materials
- [ ] Screen Space Ambient Occlusion (SSAO)
- [ ] Volumetric lighting
- [ ] Particle systems
- [ ] Audio integration
- [ ] ImGui integration for debugging
- [ ] Vulkan backend

---

*This project was created as part of a computer graphics course, demonstrating modern rendering techniques and software architecture principles.*
